---
layout: post
title: The three basic models
tags: dist101
---



Lets start with the three basic models: Synchrony, Asynchrony and Partial Synchrony.


In the **Synchronous model** there exists some known finite time bound $\Delta$. For any message sent, the adversary can delay its delivery by at most $\Delta$.

In the **Asynchronous model**, for any message sent, the adversary can delay its delivery by any finite amount of time. On the one hand there is no bound on the time to deliver but on the other hand the message must eventually be delivered.

The **Partial synchrony model** aims to find a middle ground between these two models. The assumption is that there exists some known finite time bound $\Delta$ and a special event called GST (Global Stabilization Time) such that:
* The adversary must cause the GST event to eventually happen after some unknown finite time. 
* Any message sent at time $x$ must be delivered by time $\max \{x,GST\} + \Delta$.

Informally,  the system behaves asynchronously till GST and synchronously after GST. Note that adversary can delay the GST event by any finite amount of time and that no protocol can explicitly detect that GST has occurred.

At first thought the Synchronous model seems to be good enough. Why not just assume for example that any message sent over the internet will be delivered by say 2 minutes? First, the is a trade-off:
* Setting a large and conservative $\Delta$ of say 10 minutes my indeed always be correct. However, protocol designers who depend on $\Delta$ to incur very long timeouts and hence degrade performance.
* Setting a small and aggressive $\$Delta$ of say 0.1 seconds my actually not always be correct. This means that protocols who’s safety depends on this bound may suffer safety violations.

Second, even if you think you found a magical sweet spot for $\Delta$, imagine a sender that broadcasts a messages to two receivers, one message arrives after $\Delta - \epsilon$ time and the other after $\Delta + \epsilon$. Here the real world would behave differently than the model and this could potentially cause safety problems.

To overcome the problems with synchrony, the asynchronous model forces protocol designers to assume nothing about network delays. The outcome is often very robust protocols: 
* Since they do not depend on any time bound, message delays cannot cause unexpected safety violations.
* Since they cannot use any fixed values for timeouts they often need to adapt to the actual latency of the system.

The main problem is that protocols in the asynchronous model tend to be more complex and harder to reason about. Moreover, there are many inherent gaps between synchrony and asynchrony. Two examples:
* The celebrated [Fischer, Lynch, Paterson](https://groups.csail.mit.edu/tds/papers/Lynch/jacm85.pdf) lower bound says that in the asynchronous model, any protocol that solves consensus that withstand an adversary, that can fail-stop just one party, must have an infinite execution.
* Authenticated Byzantine Agreement is possible for $n>2f$ in the synchronous model but impossible for $n \leq 3n$ in the asynchronous model. 

The Partial synchrony model was suggested in [Dwork, Lynch, Stockmeyer](https://groups.csail.mit.edu/tds/papers/Lynch/jacm88.pdf). This  model is also implicitly used in Paxos [Lamport](https://lamport.azurewebsites.net/pubs/lamport-paxos.pdf) and viewstamped replication [Oki, Liskov](https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=62549).

Partial synchrony captures the intuition that we would like to design protocols for systems that are usually synchronous but have some type of guarantee even if our synchrony assumptions become temporarily violated. In particular, a recurring theme in the Partial synchrony model is to design protocols that are always safe (even when the system is asynchronous) but provide liveness and termination guarantees only after GST (only when the system is synchronous).

Many large scale system have components that use protocols that can be reasoned about in the Partial Synchrony model: [Zookeeper](https://zookeeper.apache.org/), [etcd](https://github.com/etcd-io/etcd), [Spanner](https://cloud.google.com/spanner/), [Cosmos Hub](https://hub.cosmos.network/) and many more.

An alternative definition for Partial synchrony is to assume that there is some finite **unknown** upper bound $\Delta$ on message delivery. This bound is not known in advance and can be chosen by the adversary. 
